welcome to reality check the Sci-Fi
London podcast I'm Chris patmore South
Islanders online editor and I've
hijacked the show to bring you two
interviews that will be reality checks
as most people know good science fiction
needs good science as much as it needs
Goods fiction
in this podcast we speak with a Quantum
physicist and a psychologist and discuss
the science and ideas behind two
different TV shows that are out now on
DVD
first up we speak with David Deutsch a
fellow of the Royal Society and a
Quantum physicist at the University of
Oxford
we speak to him about the parallel
worlds portrayed in Fringe and the
forthcoming indie film another Earth
the parallel universes do you are they
metaphysics or quantum physics or just
an imagination imaginary thing of
academics
this is something that's highly
controversial among uh Quantum
physicists and I belong to a minority
faction
that believes that the parallel
universes are an unavoidable consequence
of both quantum theory and the
experiments that support quantum theory
uh and so that they are in fact real
right
would you care to um expand on that a
little
yes uh well
um there are various experiments that
can one can perform in the laboratory uh
typically the two slit experiment and
that go under the general heading of
interference experiments what happens in
these experiments is that typically
something or other can go in two or more
different directions or something can
happen in two or more different ways uh
typically a photon hits a semi-silvered
mirror and it can either go straight
through or bounce off just a single
photon
and the conventional interpretation of
quantum mechanics is that
when this happens the photon has a
probability of one half of going
straight through in a probability of one
half of bouncing off
um and uh which means that there's still
only one Photon at the end there's only
one instance of what happens and it's
either the bouncing off instance or the
going straight through instance so
either it will or it won't it either
will or it won't exactly but in an
interference experiment you can
subsequently do things to the two paths
to those two possible paths bring the
two paths together
and then uh what happens then is an
interaction called an interference
phenomenon where what happens at the end
depends on what was on both of those two
paths so like if you put a piece of
glass or or another mirror or something
else onto either of those two paths
the net effect depends on what happens
on both of them
and that means that something has gone
round both of the paths even though
there was only one photon
and so well you know the obvious
interpretation of that is that the
photon just splits into two smaller
things you know mini photons or
something is not really a single
particle and we're used to that kind of
thing happening
and so it splits into two smaller things
and they go around and then they rejoin
themselves into a photon at the end but
the trouble is you can you can
um rule that out you can rule that out
that possibility out by putting uh
interpolating Photon detectors onto the
two
um
uh onto the two paths and you find that
only one of them ever fires if you if
you shoot in one Photon then only one of
the two paths ever detects a photon and
so and it's a it's a whole photon with
the entire energy angular momentum
everything that the original Photon had
so that rules out that it's split into
two
so there's only one of them there and
yet what happens at the end depends on
what happened on both paths and these
paths can be separated by great
distances uh you know many trillions of
times the size of the photon
so um
that tells you that this this is a sort
of on the face of it a contradiction the
photon is only in one place but it
somehow sniffs out what's happening at
two or more distant locations where some
of which it might have been as it were
and then well at this point in my
opinion and I have to stress again that
this is a minority opinion at this point
the majority of businesses start talking
nonsense and say things like it's both
spread out and localized at the same
time
or that
um what actually happens to the photon
depends on what could possibly have
happened to it but in my opinion real
events can't be caused by possible
events they can only be caused by other
real events and that leads eventually
I've I've oversimplified the argument
here but that leads good essentially and
inexorably to the conclusion that both
events happen but they can't see each
other except in these rare circumstances
of interference experiments and
um so the photon that there were
actually two photons in two different
universes that normally don't see each
other at all but in these special
circumstances uh do affect each other
and the same phenomenon has been
demonstrated for not only for photons
but for material particles and atoms and
molecules and since we are made of
molecules and Obey all the same
equations as the photons we can infer
that the same is true of us and that the
universe that we see around us you know
Stars galaxies everything
is just one such thing that exists in
reality it's it's a tiny sliver of a
much larger entity that includes many
universes it's sometimes called the many
universes interpretation sometimes
called the parallel universes
interpretation because
the universe is almost don't affect each
other like parallel lines but but unlike
parallel lines they do slightly affect
each other otherwise we wouldn't have
any evidence of their existence at all
so uh right take the example of Fringe
where the two universes have developed
along different lines yes
uh so the universes will certainly
develop along different lines sometimes
radically different lines because
um the uh there are situations in which
which are sometimes explored in the in
the series Fringe and in other science
fiction
there are situations where a small
effect of a single particle such as a
cosmic ray striking can
um and in the in the according to the
Multiverse Theory when a cosmic ray
strikes the Earth it strikes it at
different places in different universes
and therefore sometimes someone is
struck and gets cancer as a result and
then dies and doesn't contribute to
human history and in another Universe
they survive and so and so you can see
how the knock-on effects of a single
subatomic particle effect can make the
two universes very different from each
other well or basically what what's
known as The Butterfly Effect I guess
yes although the the it's funny you
should mention the butterfly effect this
effect of this knock-on effect
is much greater In classical physics
than it is in quantum physics So In
classical physics it's happening all the
time uh you know butterflies flap their
wings and it affects a storm on the
other side of the world and so on turns
out that in quantum physics the
butterfly effect is much much smaller
and really the only ways in which
uh universes that are slightly different
become very different is through
a large amplification effects that are
deliberate not not uh sort of accidental
ones like in classical physics uh
Quantum universes remain close to each
other as much as they can and it's only
when something like a deliberate action
or something like you know person being
dead and and therefore not doing the
things that that he would have done that
kind of thing can make the universes
diverge but most of the time random
events do not make universes become very
different they if they're slightly
different they remain slightly different
and that's that
okay there's a lot of it's to also to do
with microcosma macrocosm and
uh yeah well let's say where if I miss
the bus or not it's not going to have a
huge effect on the on the rest of the
world but it may have a small effect on
what goes on in my life that's right
most of the time a small effect will
result in a small effect in real life
and in quantum theory classical physics
kind of misrepresented
the
uh the the uh nature of knock-on effects
so the classical picture is wrong and
and in real life uh these knock-on large
knock-on effects are rare but they do
happen
um
if you look at the world of the mystics
I mean they they talk about
almost parallel universes where there's
sort of
the reality we see plus there's the
reality with a bigger I mean is this a
similar line to what
um quantum physics is going along
um
the mysticism and science differ in
their method
um of course sometimes uh fiction
happens to
um produce a true answer you know the
the
um Sherlock Holmes had a friend called
Watson and it could be that somewhere in
the world some people who've never read
the Sherlock Holmes story uh
um name their child Sherlock Holmes and
another one names their child Watson and
they become friends and so on now that
can happen accidentally just because
even a stopped clock is right twice a
day sort of thing
um but that is not a case of
um Arthur Conan Doyle having correctly
foretold these events these these
namings that might have happened a
century later it's just a coincidence
and it's a similar thing with mysticism
occasionally uh mystical theories happen
to hit the right some of the right
answers but that doesn't mean that they
had the same knowledge as science does
later because those right answers are
rare among their answers among the
mystical answers because basically
because science is an error correcting
process and science also says a lot of
false things but then corrects them and
then the corrected Theory also has some
deficiencies which are then corrected
and so on myths
don't change except by very gradual
Evolution over many centuries and so
they don't have error correction and so
they're basically stuck with their
original mistakes forever and so that's
why mystical ways of thinking are full
of errors and don't improve whereas uh
scientific thinking
also has errors but makes them fewer and
fewer by improving
although a lot of Mystics talk about
absolute truth where you know there is
no error there is is just you know the
absolute reality
yes this is a philosophical mistake that
science struggled to escape from during
the early uh years of science uh uh
about 300 years ago
um when
um you see if you believe in absolute
truth and then you're going to believe
that you have some
and if you have some then that leads you
to judge people who disagree with you in
rather harsh ways you know they are
people who don't have the absolute truth
and if they do something that that you
think is absolutely wrong you're going
to feel entitled to suppress their idea
and the practice of science
is the practice of not doing that the
practice of being open to criticism
because one expects one's own ideas to
be mistaken in some unknown ways even if
they're largely right one expects that
there are unknown errors in our ways of
looking at things and that in fact all
our ignorance of the world you know the
the things that we don't yet know
whether the Higgs boson exists and and
whether the universe will
um uh tear itself apart at the end of
time all those things are due to
misconceptions that we currently have
about what the laws of physics are and
how the universe is set up so the the
progress of science depends on certain
values of science such as uh tolerance
and Truth seeking and fallibleism the
belief that one can be mistaken
um whereas the values that stem from a
belief in absolute truth uh sorry of
absolute knowledge absolute truth is is
perfectly harmless and in fact good
um uh concept but the idea that one can
know it that there's a way of knowing
absolute truth is a path to intolerance
and to error
because um
you know I have an interest in
um Vedic
um philosophy and a lot a lot of the
stuff they talk about there is
I mean the really in-depth stuff is
coming around there's also being exposed
in
um in Quantum and quantum physics
yeah well a lot of the time they're
talking about the same thing but in in
different languages so to speak I fear
not
um the thing is
um when you look at uh some
um scientific idea and then compare it
with a mystical text with the benefit of
hindsight
then you can always see uh the parallels
just like in these experiments where
they hand out horoscopes to people and
ask them whether the horoscope matches
their their life the match is a
description of them and they will with
much greater than than a much greater
probability than chance itself would
allow they will say the horoscope does
match them and does describe them
correctly even if the horoscopes were
handed out randomly to the sample of
people and this this
um is due to the human Minds desire to
impose order on the world
the to see patterns in the world this is
what makes us human this is the thing we
do better than any other animal
but it is error-prone and if you have if
you apply that ability without also
applying the hard one methods of science
to weed out the inherent tendency to
error in that in that very ability then
you will just see patterns where there
aren't any and uh you know with the
benefit of a hindsight a lot of things
look like quantum mechanics but with the
benefit of foresight none of those World
Views that claim now with the benefit of
hindsight to be like quantum mechanics
predicted a single one of the amazing
experimental outcomes of quantum
mechanics
and that has got to be the test because
without that test
we already tried being not not having
science and for hundreds of thousands of
years our species discovered nothing and
is only discovered new things since we
applied this error correcting process of
not just looking for patterns but
looking for patterns and applying
methods that can get rid of errors that
look true
so um would you say that um
in a way I mean this is going more into
philosophy than than physics that we all
actually live in uh
parallel worlds because we have the
reality that we perceive and the reality
of the world around us
which is sort of what you were just
saying now you look back on things with
hindsight and you can uh um analyze them
in that way
uh yes uh I I think I agree I'm not
entirely sure I understand what you just
said but well so we have a
um an opinion of ourselves and our
vision of the world
and yet you know someone else has
another vision of the world but it's
still the same world ah right I see okay
so so there we go we live our world but
there's another world but they could be
perceived as um parallel universes I
understand
um yes so
um
because we're fallible
um the world as we see it is not the
same as the actual world
um there is such a thing as the actual
world but what we see is only an
interpretation of it that is bound to
have lots of discrepancies from the real
one
um now
there is also another world a parallel
world which looks much more like the one
that we perceive so in a way our mistake
happens to match up with the real thing
um just like
um the the in in the in the imaginary
story I told a fictional story might
accidentally match up with a real event
and even though the author thought he
was writing fiction in fact it was a
true account of a real event Elsewhere
on Earth or at a different time and
similarly it will always be true that a
fictional event that makes sense
will be a real event in some other
universe so that is true however again
just as with the fiction does that does
not mean that when we perceive that
happening we are accurately perceiving
the other world because as I just said
it's bound to be true if what we see
makes sense at all it's bound to be true
that it exists in another world that
doesn't mean we've perceived the other
world it just means we've imagined it
hmm
who I'm going back to the mystics again
I mean the mystics talk about seeing the
world as nothing more than vibrations
yes which I mean does sort of correspond
to what quantum physics is talking about
in a way doesn't it well again only with
hindsight I'm afraid
um for example I I also we got no proof
of what they actually saw
well yes uh quite and if they had seen
something they could have made some
startling predictions
uh which would you know for example if
we look at uh early physics of the
ancient Greeks or the uh or the Arabs in
the Golden Age we can sometimes find
that they they
surprisingly did have some scientific
knowledge that uh
um we uh thought had only been invented
much later but in those cases this
knowledge LED them to make a prediction
which was surprising and that prediction
is borne out
and if anybody had known the truth of
quantum theory before uh the 1920s they
would have easily made predictions that
are absolutely startling
so um and they didn't
and so when they speak of for example
vibrations is a very good example
vibrations is a is a a phrase that
um could mean isn't used in fundamental
physics it's only used for
um engineering type applications of
physics and regarded as a as a as
denoting something in fundamental
physics it could be a lot of things and
it could be
waves and there are interpretations of
quantum mechanics in which particles are
waves and in ways of energy yeah
particle wave duality
unfortunately from my perspective
particle wave Duality is part of the
equivocation and nonsense that was
talked by the early pioneers of quantum
theory in an attempt to avoid the
parallel universes implications and in
fact there is no particle wave Duality
what the the wave is is not a vibration
in anything it's the extended it's the
extended nature of a wave that they were
talking about not its chain going up and
down like a vibration it's just the fact
that it's in more than one place at a
time and the more than one place at a
time in reality translates into being in
different places in different universes
not to moving from one to the other in a
vibratory way
so if somebody had understood the
parallel universe's implication of
quantum mechanics somehow before the
1920s vibration would have been the last
word they would have used they they
would have denied that quantum theory
has anything to do with vibrations
uh they're they they do use a word
nowadays fluctuations
which is likewise very misleading
fluctuations is is another of these
double talk words that pretends that
objects kind of go from one to the other
very rapidly but there's no such process
described by the equations what the
equations describe is existing in both
places at once
well I guess one of the things that
hampers all this is actual language I
mean it's you asked someone to describe
God yes which you know lots of
scientists have issues with anyway but
yeah how can you describe something as
immense as that it's you know you're
trying to
bring something down in just into words
that cannot be explained almost
well uh I guess this is an issue that
you also scientists faces you're trying
to explain something when you whenever
you give it a name it's it is but it
isn't at the same time
uh the thing is
um science is
um hard to understand hard to explain
and hard to test
but tests are possible and when you have
a weird theory that says that the world
is very different from what our
intuition and our apparent experience
seems to say
uh what science does is in the process
of of sharpening that idea correcting
the ambiguities in the idea and
correcting the errors in the idea it
eventually comes to
a prediction and that prediction is the
opposite of all those things it's the
opposite of ambiguous
it is clear that everybody involved
knows that if the spot of light falls on
one place on the photographic plate or
on the sensitive
um uh receiver then the theory is true
and if it falls on the other place then
it's false and
um the exciting thing that happens in
science is that in some cases these
theories can make predictions that are
absolutely amazing
the the idea that the the uh place where
the the a single particle lands depends
on what all the the whole apparatus was
doing apparatus several meters across so
that something about that particle was
probing that whole apparatus is at
something that you can't see is
absolutely astounding in my opinion more
astounding than any of the things
imagined by mysticism or religion so
they and we can understand them and then
somebody else can go away and says and
say well if that's true then this other
amazing thing should happen and lo and
behold it does happen so for example
well we haven't actually verified this
yet but one of the predictions of
quantum theory is that you can build
computers
that using quantum theory that are
enormously faster than uh for certain
types of problem a quantum computer
could solve it
faster than
any classical computer including one
that was built of all the matter in the
universe say so here's the experiment
you take all the matter in the universe
you build a computer out of it you run
that computer on this problem and it
takes a certain time to solve the
problem a simple quantum computer made
of a few atoms could solve that problem
in a microsecond
and we all know the answer is 42. yeah
exactly yeah yeah and no but you can
make it so that
you can you can choose a um a problem
such that the answer is easy to verify
once you have it but very hard to find
in the first place
so uh even a normal computer can verify
that it's the right answer unlike in the
case of deep thought and 42.
um so um what you do is uh what you
would do is run this program then verify
it gave the right answer and then that
shows that some process
produced that answer that was more
complex than the entire visible universe
which means that there is more there
than the entire visible universe but it
means something much more exciting than
that it means that this other stuff
that is there in addition to the entire
visible universe
obeys equations that we know
we have knowledge that is so powerful
and sophisticated that it can describe
and predict and understand
the motion of this entity that is
trillions of times more complex than the
entire universe and we can harness it to
do a little mathematical calculation for
us now that's something that was never
guessed by any mysticism
but it has been predicted by quantum
theory and we're hoping to you know
verify this in the next few decades
and also if we fail to verify it and if
the answer comes out different we will
know that we were wrong whereas that the
theory was wrong whereas theories about
mysticism are never exposed to this kind
of danger of being proved wrong and
therefore when they are wrong they just
remain in their erroneous state
attractive though they might be but lots
of attractive things are false there's a
new film coming out
soon called Another Earth an identical
planet Earth complete with exactly the
same people living on it appears in the
sky right complete with moon
and I mean the story just it seems to
lack any scientific grounding whatsoever
I mean the the fact that
um if the an identical planet Earth
appeared visibly in ass Skyline yeah the
just the physical attraction of the two
planets would create absolutely yes and
even the the idea that these two planets
were exactly the same and all the people
on it lived exactly the same lives seems
a little improbable to me to my mind
that couldn't happen in our universe so
they must be assuming that this this
planet Came From Another Universe
which is contrary to the laws of quantum
physics as we know them but you know in
science fiction you could imagine and
that's what that's what Fringe does it
imagines that the laws of physics are
slightly different from what we know
them to be from what we believe them to
be which after all is perfectly Allowed
by by science you know we we expect
our opinion about what the laws of
physics are to be slightly wrong
so that's a legitimate piece of Science
Fiction there so this is the thing with
science fiction even if you make up the
science you've got to make the science
sound plausible yes now that that's a
very important point and uh in in my
book The the beginning of infinity when
I discussed parallel universes I also
discussed the issue of what is the
difference between
um uh the fiction uh and fictional
science and other universes is they they
all overlap in conceptually those things
and one of the things is
um that the fictional science has to
make sense in its own terms
um so that's uh and I try to explain the
Multiverse theory in my book uh in terms
of a fictional story first I start with
the fictional story about parallel
universes and then I point out that this
doesn't make sense in certain ways so we
fix it and we get a better theory of and
so on and we eventually end up with with
the actual theory of quantum parallel
universes uh I'm afraid yeah I don't
know about the film you spoke about but
Rhys there was a film a few years ago
called sliding doors oh yeah yeah also
about parallel universes and that one a
rather interestingly it was a sort of
tour de force I thought because it
managed to have an interesting story
about parallel universes that do not in
fact interact with each other
so that story was perfectly consistent
with existing quantum mechanics such
things do happen in reality
and making a story about them is it is a
terrific Challenge and I thought they
did it very well and they also showed
how
did the butterfly effect isn't isn't
right the the things which become
different as a result of a small change
in these two universes are all human
mediated things and that is exactly what
would happen what does happen in in in
the real Multiverse all the time yeah I
thought it was a brilliant film it is a
concept that's been used quite a lot in
science fiction films and there's also a
film called primer that came out a few
years ago I don't know if you've seen
that that I didn't see no but that was
more to do with time travel and these
guys built a machine that could
um you could only travel forward 10
minutes
oh yes and but they kept they ended up
with four or five different versions of
themselves ah and they had to keep
watching themselves to make sure that
they didn't do something else and it's
that's that's uh interesting because the
theory of time travel and theory of uh
that if time travel is possible that's
the same kind of variant theory of
quantum mechanics as the theory that
travel between universes is possible uh
the science fiction stories that are
imagining
contact between different universes like
Fringe
um are Imagining the same kind of
variant physics laws of physics as the
stories that imagine time travel
so it's and we can't rule that out we
can't absolutely rule out the existence
of such things
um at the moment what we can say though
is that if time travel is possible time
travel into the past is possible then
um it's necessarily also involves
traveling to other universes you can't
necessarily
um make yourself go to the to a earlier
point in your own Universe if you go to
an earlier point it is in general to
that of Another Universe and that's what
avoids the paradoxes so although you can
you can end up with multiple copies of
yourself what you can't end up with is a
paradox where you prevent yourself from
setting out in the first place
yeah you know killing your grandfather I
don't know why they why this Paradigm of
this Paradox is killing your grandfather
that nothing so violent is is required
all you have to do is set up an
experiment where you agree that if
you're if you appear out of the time
machine you're not going to go in it
during that experiment
and that's a simple Paradox in itself
yeah uh if you apply quantum theory to
this Paradox you find that indeed you
cannot go to the the laws of quantum
physics
prevent you from going to the um
uh past of your own universe but they do
not prevent you from going to the past
of other universes and what happens then
is that some universities end up with
two or more copies of you and in some
universes you've gone into a time
machine and never came back
yeah yeah I love time travel movies
because they
they can just really mess up your head
basically yeah well most of them
unfortunately do not bother with making
sense and I don't like science fiction
that doesn't make sense
I don't mind if they imagine different
laws of physics in fact I like that that
that's the good thing about science
fiction but uh and I think Fringe for
example uh although sometimes it's
deliberately silly I think a lot of the
episodes are kind of
joke episodes as it was yeah yeah but I
did the same with X-Files as well well
X-Files was was uh I I think that was
the case of
um really not trying to make sense I'm
afraid but the basic storyline of Fringe
if you neglect the joke episode aspects
are really are trying to make sense and
do quite nicely explore the issues that
arise
out of taking seriously the existence of
multiple copies you know like you know
which one is you which one is the real
you does it make sense to ask which one
is the real you and if you have the same
thoughts and the same feelings and fall
in love with the same people uh are you
really any different from each other and
uh they slightly oh simplify the problem
at least in the episodes I've seen I
haven't seen all the episodes but in the
episodes I've seen there are only two
parallel universes
uh but in real life there are uh
enormous numbers of them
so uh but practically anything you can
imagine that makes sense happens in some
universe or other
because we're going back to the time
travel I mean one could say that
actually time doesn't exist because
there is only the present
uh yes well that's that's a mistake
um the the physics at least according to
physics uh physics doesn't distinguish
between the present and any other time
so what the present is is a is a
perspective on the Multiverse and in
fact the different times are just
different universes they they happen to
be the ones that physics allows us to
know more about by direct observation uh
there are countless other ones that that
are much harder to see that we see only
through their indirect effects via
um interference phenomena and that the
past and the future are just the names
that we give to parallel universes that
we have much more direct
um evidence of and interaction with
uh the the difference between different
nouns different present times is the
same thing as the difference between
different perspectives in space so if
you imagine the different copies of you
of different times they're rather like
different people standing around a
monument looking at it from different
angles
and
um in space we can see them all at once
so we're not tempted to say that they
that one of them is real and the other
one isn't
but uh in fact in time they are all real
in exactly the same sense that all the
parallel universes of quantum theory are
real the past the present and the future
are all real
when we say that one's mind immediately
jumps to the mistake of thinking oh well
if they're real they're all real at the
same time no that isn't true they're not
real all real at the same time because
they're all different times so that
would be rather like saying that all
those observers of the monument are all
real at the same angle
no they're not they're all real at
different angles all the different
angles are real
all the different perspectives on the
monument are real perspectives but none
of them is the monument
the monument
contains all perspectives the actual
three-dimensional object determines all
the perspectives and all the different
perceptions of it
same with time
because uh someone told me once that um
we'd talk about aliens and they said
aliens exist but only in the future
um
the you may I'm not sure what he might
have meant by that did he mean that we
are going to become the aliens as we
spread out well I think it means that
like like you said with all these
different parallels they if people see
them they're seeing something that's in
a if the CIA lens they're not seeing
them in this actual present day they're
seeing something that's leaked through
from uh from a future I see well of
course there's no evidence that uh
anything can leak through from the
future and as I said if it did that
would be a
that would have massive implications for
parallel universes because it would
always leak through into another
Universe if we saw an alien coming out
of a time machine it would have come
that alien would have come from a
universe that isn't our future
that we might believe that there would
be aliens in our future is if we also
had reason to believe that the alien
came from a universe that was very like
ours
um which we might have we might have
such evidence uh but again the the uh
this is all different from the question
of whether there are aliens out there
because whether there are aliens out
there is a question that's open to
experimental testing
um a few hundred years ago people
imagined that there might be or less
than that and even a hundred years ago
people imagined that there might be
uh civilizations on the moon
uh or perhaps on The Far Side of the
Moon which which we can never see from
Earth and That Was Then tested because
we can now uh look at photo high
resolution photographs of The Far Side
of the Moon on Google Earth you can
actually look for yourself and see
whether there are any cities there and
and there aren't so that that
Theory
was tested
and science made progress so 100 years
ago we did not know this and now we do
know it this is like uh Nikola Tesla was
convinced that there was life on Mars
uh was it Tesla uh yes I mean I I know
that
um uh uh Lowell
um the astronomer was was convinced of
that and by the way the the history of
Mars astronomy is a very good example of
um the ability of humans to see patterns
when they aren't there because different
uh
astronomers all saw these canals on Mars
and actually the canals are just an
artifact of what happens when you stare
very hard at something and expect a
pattern to be there and it's if it's
just at the limit of what your eye can
resolve your brain inserts the pattern
it's not a matter of fraud or anything
like that it's just a matter of the
ability of the brain to see patterns
which is absolutely crucial in our
discovering real patterns but far more
often than real patterns it sees things
that aren't there at all and the method
of science is to find ways of
systematically eliminating though the
majority of perceptions which are are of
things that aren't there at all and
finding the ones that are there testing
that and then going with that idea which
itself is usually flawed in some other
way but it but in that way we get more
and more knowledge
this this is the thing that that methods
of proceeding with knowledge other than
science don't do they don't correct
their errors
excellent
ah so good well it's very enjoyable
um uh thanks for the conversation I
appreciate it thank you it's uh yeah it
is
pretty much blown my mind for the rest
of the day
Fringe season three is out now on DVD
now we speak with Dr Patrick Layman a
psychologist from Royal Holloway
University of London and an expert in
conspiracy theories such as those
portrayed in the TV series The Event
um well let's start with the event
because that that's one of the more
recent Conspiracy Theory TV shows that's
been out do you think
um I mean there's lots of different
types of conspiracy theories like it's
one of the more popular ones is the
possibility of aliens existing
do you is that one one of the strands
you prefer to fall follow or is it the
more political types of conspiracies
all right well I I sort of researched
kind of the psychological basis of all
different types of conspiracies so
something like I mean in fact something
like the idea of aliens living amongst
us is is classic
um material for a conspiracy theory
because it kind of pushes all the right
sorts of buttons in terms of having a
sort of hidden powerful uh different
group uh doing different sorts of things
and of course in the event it's tied up
with with a load of um perhaps concerns
or beliefs about conspiracies in in
contemporary Society big government
those sorts of things which will feed
into this this General sense of of
conspiracies going on in the world today
yeah I guess also with aliens it's a lot
harder to prove that their existence
whereas with political conspiracy
theories it yet there is much more it's
much easier to to prove that they do
exist
I suppose I suppose if you've got a a
green alien with bubbly eyes then it's
probably a bit easier but
there's also something that's more
exotic about conspiracy theories
involving aliens and and one thing that
that we we need to have a a really good
conspiracy theory is it's very difficult
to to see a conspiracy theory if you
feel like you're on the inside of that
group so we find it so the psychological
research shows that there's more or
there's higher levels of belief amongst
people who feel in some way disconnected
from society so people like um uh people
who are in sort of uh low economic
groups who are into ethnic minority
groups they perhaps feel less of a
connection to society more on the
outside of it and and that automatically
gives higher levels of beliefs and
conspiracy theories and of course with
aliens absolutely you know this is a
completely different group completely
alien groups so this is already
fulfilled that thing of being something
sinister something unknown something
shadowy something that that's very
different from from what we are and so
they're bound to be up to no good if you
see what I mean yeah but I guess also
the Other Extreme you get people who are
above average intelligence who also
question everything that they see and
hear and don't believe anything that
they read in the papers
um
um similarity between some of the some
of the real hardcore conspiracy
theorists and what what are the many of
the qualities of a really good
journalist or a really good scientist so
sort of doggedly pursuing the truth you
know not taking no for an answer not not
just saying yes to the easy questions
there's something very similar about
that the difference between a good
journalist or a good scientist and a a
lot of the hardcore conspiracy theorists
is that that at some point there comes
there comes a sense in which you have to
be objective about the truth and that
you can be open to changing your mind
and sometimes some of the sort of died
in the wall conspiracy theorists don't
see that
um but it's kind of getting into a
mindset which has a lot of very positive
qualities so it's a very bright people
believing conspiracy theories
um it's more actually kind of where you
start out and what you're looking for
that's important in your in your beliefs
does that make sense yeah I I have a
motto that is question everything doubt
nothing
yeah it's uh
I think that's I think that's a really
it's a re again that's a really good
good um motto to have and um there comes
a point where you have to make judgments
so
if you're constantly questioning
constantly doubting
um then you might run into problems but
also there's quite a lot of people who
have really strong beliefs in some
conspiracy theories
um some conspiracies are absolutely true
of course so it's right to pursue them
but sometimes if your belief in your
conspiracy theory shuts you off to
Alternative explanations that's a
problem
yeah you can tend towards fanaticism and
paranoia and all sorts of psychological
problems
that quite often I talk to colleagues
who are researching in it and they say
oh but you know they'll try and look at
the psychology behind it and there's
this sense in which they want to paint
all conspiracy theorists or even people
who believe in conspiracy theories as in
some ways psychologically
problematized or it's some they've got
some sort of underlying paranoia or
delusional set of beliefs
um but but you know it's not as simple
as that there are conspiracies and it's
perfectly rational to believe in in some
of them the question is an interesting
one where do you draw the line when do
you say hang on a minute this probably
was just a lone gunman or this probably
was just a drunk driver
um they keep you guessing they they are
the perfect thing to draw you in to uh
to want to investigate yourself like
like almost like detective things like
there's something that draws them in
draws you in rather as a someone who's
listening to the evidence and everything
yeah I guess because they can't it's
very hard to disprove or or prove them
um
which we always see I mean that's
probably the same thing could be said
for religion I mean lots of people
consider anybody that follows any sort
of religion is can be a crackpot as well
especially amongst academics absolutely
and and this yeah they're both a lot
about faith and a lot about evidence as
well they're all it's all sort of
contestable yeah you realize life is
very uncertain and we don't like it
um but on one level we're fascinated by
it as well in so in in the event the the
idea that there's a sort of hidden group
of people
um that that almost draws you into doing
that sort of thing to constantly
questioning to make you a little bit
more uncertain about the world because
we do actually live in an uncertain
world we don't like to live in an
uncertain world we like certainty and
predictability in what we do but but a
really good TV show will draw you in to
to make you feel some of that tension
some of that uncertainty some of that
anxiety and in excitement about
um not being so sure anymore it kind of
feeds on on I suppose the paranoia or or
feeds on our fears in a way that that a
lot of really really classic good good
Horrors do as well so yeah absolutely
it's it's good that there's lots of good
qualities and constantly questioning
constantly asking
um and there's something a bit different
about concern series when they perhaps
tip over the edge to to not seeing a
more balanced argument
yeah one of the things I really like
about conspiracy theories is the fact
that they made they're a good grounding
for really really good fiction
yeah
well we X-Files is a perfect example of
it but a lot of the time you
you can believe everything that you that
they talk about in that show is all
plausible and a lot of it has been quite
heavily researched
absolutely and there's you know that one
of the things that that's great about
the really good conspiracy there is is
that there's almost no better story
there's a mixture of creative sort of
creativeness in constructing the story
there's uncertainty it can be developed
in different ways you can look at
evidence and interpret it in different
ways and so there's kind of a sense in
which the the story can really develop
in an interesting way because there are
some people involved in it who remain
hidden so there's a sense of discovery
about something there's also this sense
of excitement because it's an important
thing that you're discovering so yeah
there's something about the story to all
conspiracies that almost automatically
draws Us in and you sort of can't let it
go it's it's part of what it's the the
nature of it that that's kind of what
inspires your your your investigation
into it I guess one of the most popular
ones at the moment would have to be
things that just had its 10th
anniversary is the 911 and the Twin
Towers
yeah
with all the news coverage that's was
given to it that also gives them a lot
the The Conspiracy Theory it's a lot
more fuel to work with as well doesn't
it
absolutely and there's always in in any
big event like that there's always going
to be
thousands and thousands probably
millions of different pieces of evidence
relating to everything from the the
backgrounds of the hijackers to to the
construction of the buildings and the
the ways in which they collapsed and and
with so much evidence there's always
going to be room for doubt room to to
discuss and argue and debate it and that
you're right that that kind of that that
possibility the fact that even that
information is there fuels discussion
fuels alternative accounts it's it's
part of why a big event
um is very often associated with
conspiracy theories it's but some of my
research looked at exactly that that
these these big events seem to really
draw conspiracy theories towards them
for some reason partly I think because
we don't like having a very mundane
explanation for them it again it
unsettles us it makes us think that the
world is a bit more uncertain
and then this is the old other theories
all about
um the New World Order and and the
Bilderberg is and these people that are
actually controlling the world
do you do you buy into any of these
theories or do you not actually have a
personal interesting conspiracy who's
but just a bit more interested in
studying people that look at the
theories
do you have a view on some of them but I
think from my my research perspective I
do try and set that aside and just look
at why people have the beliefs that they
do because of course
um
some of these theories might be true
people do conspire to do bad things and
sometimes they have they have they
sometimes they're successful and
sometimes these things happen so
um of course some conspiracies are true
some are false um and sometimes
um you know the evidence points towards
something a bit more going on but but no
I try and set them aside and kind of
focus on just on the question of why do
people believe and not try and second
guess whether I think this one's a good
one or whether ill this really is still
alive or all that sort of stuff
it's quite it's quite a good principle
is that quite more often than not it's
probably up rather than conspiracy
that that explains what's gone on
um but that but actually you're right to
keep questioning because they do they do
happen so like Watergate you know no one
would ever have guessed this or found
this out unless two journalists have
really gone after the truth there
um I think at some personal danger as
well
well because I guess all this social
media is a good way it must really get
conspiracy theories spreading a lot
quicker than they would have in the old
days
the first the first really went well it
wasn't sort of social media but the
first one that really went was the Diana
one where there was a conspiracy website
within about an hour of her dying
uh some some guy in Australia had set up
a conspiracy website already then and he
was like in Australia and I don't know
how he could quite found out about all
the details of the crash but
um that suddenly it catches like
wildfire there's communities but people
like-minded people to get together to
like confirm them their own evaluation
of the evidence so
um there's lots of good things about
social media
um and yeah I suppose it's good to
communicate and good to share ideas but
there's just more opportunity for these
things to grow I think yeah yeah
and also make people look ridiculous
because some people do end up looking
quite ridiculous with their theories as
well
you believe them very that
allow them are quite
stunning and if you look I don't know if
you I have to we'll have to look at the
truth is out there about that film but
I think the the interesting stuff comes
when you start challenging people on
both sides of the argument you start if
you had a sort of interview and
challenged a conspiracy theorist but
also challenge someone who was really
dead certain that for example JFK was
just assassinated by a loan government
there was no conspiracy or or anything
else you know as soon as you challenge
people you start questioning their
certainty and they either don't like it
or they suddenly get made more uncertain
so
the first and only season of the event
is out now on DVD